# Agile

Agile is a rapid application software development methodology that focuses on
highly iterative design. The term was coined in 2001 with the publication of
the *Manifesto for Agile Software Development*, which was written by a group
of software developers who wanted to share what they had learned about
project management. Agile is the latest popular example of a lightweight
software development method. The first of these were developed in the 1990s
as an alternative to the prevailing heavyweight methods, which were heavily
micro-managed and rigidly planned. Many of Agile's lightweight predecessors
are now considered agile methods.

Agile methodology operates on a number of core principles. Key to these
principles is the idea of rapid, iterative design. The agile philosophy is
that a product should be broken up into small parts that can be rapidly
developed so that results can be shown to the client constantly. If the
requirements for any piece of the product or the whole product itself should
change at any point, the team can respond quickly to those changes because
they haven't been developing something too unwieldy to redesign.

Team management is also critical. Each team must be **cross-functional** --
that is, a team that can organize and manage itself throughout the entirety
of their piece of the project and each iteration of that piece. This means
that a single team is continuously working in every step of development, from
planning and design, to coding and testing. It can therefore respond quickly
to any changes, instead of needing to wait upon another department or team.

Agile development has become the norm. While each company might have their
own personalized implementation of agile, the basic principles are incredibly
popular. Companies such as Microsoft, Facebook, Amazon, Spotify, and even
teams at Google are using agile methodologies to respond to the needs of
their clients and to rapidly get products published.

## Terms

**Co-location** is a critical part of agile methodology. This is the idea
that a team is all working out of the same space. Face to face communication
allows for team building, faster communication and collaboration, and an
easier time responding to the iterative process of agile development.

**Pair programming** is an agile technique that results in a significant
improvement to product quality. Two people approaching a task bring with them
different backgrounds, experiences, information, and expertise. Open
discussion about how to approach and solve a particular problem often leads
to a better solution than a programmer working solo, who might try to
implement the first solution they devise.

**Test-driven development** leads to more agile code. The better unit tests
are in place, the easier it is to keep code error-free and rapidly iterate
upon it. Writing tests before writing code means that all the design work is
done first, so that the product will do exactly what it needs to do.
Similarly, **refactoring** is a key principle. Because each piece of code is
iterated upon so often in the agile process, constant refactoring is
important to keep clutter down and to keep code easy to maintain. With the
presence of tests, developers can refactor safely, knowing that their
refactoring won't have broken a key aspect of their product.

**Continuous integration** is the process of integrating newly developed code
back into a main branch multiple times a day. With robust enough tests in
place, code can safely be merged as soon as even a small feature is complete.
This prevents needing to reconcile massive merge conflicts, which can be
fairly common if multiple developers were working on multiple feature
branches. Resolving these conflicts can sometimes take longer than writing
the feature itself.

## Alternatives

One of the oldest methodologies is the **waterfall** method. In the waterfall
method, each phase in the development process is fully completed before
moving on to the next one. For example, all the planning and design gets done
and is approved before any of the coding starts, and all the code gets
written before any testing happens. While this does lead to a
well-documented, very stable path of development, the process does not lend
itself well to any alterations made to the product partway through the
process.

**Prototyping** consists of making multiple prototypes that will eventually
be refined towards a final product. This allows a client to provide feedback
on these prototypes and get a sense of actually working with the product,
instead of having to produce feedback based only on documentation or
descriptions.

The **spiral** method is an iterative design methodology that blends aspects
of other methodologies based on risk analysis. Each iteration goes through
distinct phases, and repeatedly passes through these phases until completion.
Depending on the stage of development and the risk factors involved, the
spiral method pulls in elements of the waterfall method, prototyping, or a
basic incremental method in which projects are built in small pieces at a
time.
