# Writing a Swap Function?

Students often ask whether it is possible to write a Ruby method that
swaps two variables. The tl;dr is to do this:

```ruby
x, y = 3, 4
y, x = x, y
```

The longer answer is that you cannot write a swap **method** in
Ruby. There is no way to get access to the name of the arguments
outside a function, so we can't rebind them. For instance if we could
write

```ruby
x, y = 3, 4
swap(x, y)
# Now x = 4, y = 3
```

that would mean that `swap` somehow knows that the names of the
arguments passed in are `x` and `y`. But that's not how methods work.
The arguments are evaluated before the `swap` method is called, and
then references to the objects (not the names of the variables) are
passed into the method.

Take another example that helps explain why object references are
passed to functions: what is `swap(3, 4)` supposed to do? Here we're
passing in **immediate** values; they aren't even stored in variables.

Other languages allow you to write swap variables. Here's an example
from C:

```c
void swap (int* xp, int* yp) {
  int z = *yp;
  *yp = *xp;
  *xp = z;
}

void main () {
  int x = 3;
  int y = 4;

  swap(&x, &y);
  // Now x == 4 and y == 3.
}
```

In `main`, we ask C to create space for two `int`s, and to store `3`
and `4` in them. The expression `x` returns the value stored in the
memory allocated for `x`. The expression `&x` returns a **pointer**,
which is the memory address which the value for `x` lives in.

The `swap` function takes in two **pointers** (that's what `int*`
means); it does **not** take two int **values**. The code of `swap`
pulls the value stored at `yp` (`*yp` means to pull the value out of
the memory address `yp`) and stores this in memory for the variable
`z`. Next, we pull out the value at memory address `xp` (`*xp`) and
copy it into memory address `yp` (`*yp = ...`). Lastly, we copy the
value of `z` into memory address `xp`.

Because `swap` changes the memory that underlies the `x` and `y`
variables in `main`, the swapping is visible outside `swap`.

Swapping can be accomplished other ways in other languages. For
instance, in Lisp, `swap` could be written as a macro. Macros in Lisp
don't evaluate their arguments. The raw, unevaluated Lisp expression
is passed into the macro, which can then manipulate it. But we won't
talk about that right now :-)
